for folks just getting into the world of
pc customization there's probably
nothing more exciting than rgb lighting
but a close second has got to be
overclocking your processor just go to
any large computer enthusiast forum and
you'll encounter tons of people
passionately discussing their
overclocking results their cooling
systems and which cpus are the most
forgiving for tinkerers
but as active and vibrant as the
overclocking community is
have you ever wondered whether it's even
worth it to go through the hassle of
making adjustments to your cpu to
squeeze every last megahertz you can out
of your hardware before it reaches the
point of instability well it really
depends on what you're trying to
accomplish although seasoned veterans of
the overclocking game know this well
novices who get excited after buying
their first unlocked cpu may not know
that while you certainly can get a
performance bump by overclocking you're
not likely to change your computing
experience in a jaw-dropping way
but why would that be
well as we discussed in this episode the
improvements that we've seen with cpus
over the past couple of decades have
largely been due to changing their
architectures that is the way that the
pathways that handle logic inside the
processor are put together as well as
shrinking transistor sizes that make the
processors faster and more power
efficient like don't get me wrong higher
clock speeds are still better but this
is only true when you're comparing like
to like that is to say two processors
with the same micro architecture and the
same number of course
and to top it off you're almost
certainly not going to be able to get
close to say
doubling the factory clock speed at home
unless you're running some sort of
incredibly exotic high dollar cooling
setup and the thing to bear in mind guys
is that even then that kind of equipment
is usually meant for short-term
overclocks in a competition environment
not for everyday use with a standard air
or water cooler you're likely to get a
few hundred megahertz bump but anything
north of one gigahertz is probably going
to be a bit of a challenge
so
does that mean overclocking is a huge
waste of time and does nothing practical
well no we're not saying that at all
we're just saying to have realistic
expectations which includes knowing how
different types of programs and games
utilize your cpu and your gpu in
different ways
you see while some applications are
heavily tied to cpu performance
including programs that do lots of
encoding such as video editing and file
compression utilities
others don't really care that much how
fast your cpu is and this includes many
games which are often much more tied to
how quickly your gpu can spit out frames
so if you were to overclock your cpu by
a few hundred megahertz you could expect
your files to compress or your videos to
export a little bit faster but you might
actually see virtually no improvement
when you're gaming that is unless you're
playing a title where there's a great
deal of cpu-bound logic such as some
larger scale simulation games however
graphics card overclocking might end up
being quite useful with some titles
getting a bump of 5 or even 10 frames
per second or more which could
noticeably smooth out your experience
especially if you're getting an extra 5
or 10 frames during a dip while the
action's intense
there is something to be said though for
the ease with which you can overclock a
modern chip back in the day overclocking
was far more tedious as we explained in
this video but these days with easy to
use firmware and overclocking software
combined with power efficient chips that
don't need a super expensive motherboard
to overclock dialing in your settings
can take mere seconds and then
validating those seconds is often a
matter of doing an automated stress test
for a few hours up to a couple of days
plus many folks love overclocking as a
fun hobby and a way to get free
performance out of their rigs even if
it's not going to turn their home battle
station into the cray supercomputer
and while overclocking typically voids a
standard cpu warranty modern processors
are so reliable that this isn't much of
a concern for most tinkerers so as far
as we're concerned give it a shot the
results might not be earth-shattering
but it's one of the few times in life
that you can go faster for free
now if you'll excuse me i'm off to a
traffic court
just kidding do you want to get the most
out of your overclocking experience
check out the intel performance
maximizer a free way to confidently
bring added performance to your unlocked
system this intelligent tool analyzes
your processor's individual performance
characteristics and makes custom
overclocking automatic and simple then
for additional peace of mind consider
intel's performance tuning protection
plan for a nominal price your 9th gen
intel core processor is covered in case
it fails due to overclocking so check
out the intel links below and make your
overclocking experience both easier and
less stressful
so thanks for watching guys like dislike
check out our other videos leave a
comment if you have a suggestion for a
future video and don't forget to
subscribe
forgetting to subscribe to techwiki is
the leading cause of
dead birds